# Semantic Segmentation Of Satellite Images For Mapping


Many disasters occur in regions that are missing from the maps and the first responders lack information to make valuable decisions regarding their relief efforts. There is a collaborative project called Missing Maps which supports OpenStreetMap community in developing technologies, skills, work-flows, and communities. Missing Maps volunteers manually label features like roads, buildings, rivers, highways and other classes of importance on satellite images. The mapped labels are then validated manually by another set of volunteers. These efforts are critical for humanitarian missions and there is a large volunteer community that coordinates and works on supplying timely and accurate maps of such regions. Currently, updating maps is a highly manual process requiring a large number of human labelers to either create features or rigorously validate generated outputs. As there have been several successful implementations of the image segmentation algorithms in the last few years, our project aims to utilize those advancements to make pixel-wise class predictions for highways and buildings. The aim is to contribute to this worldwide mapping efforts by giving tools that can be used either to generate initial labels or to help identify possible mislabeling using satellite images.

This projects implements a U-net style neural network architecture to accomplish this image segmentation task. The dataset represents several challanges. First the distribution of the labels, where most of the pixels belong to the label 'background'. Only about 10% of the pixels belong to the class of buildings. Roads are much rarer (0.7%) and much harder to classify, as they are denoted as one-pixel line width. Class imbalance problem is further amplified by the fact that making distinction between buildings and estimating their number is critical for readers of the maps, however close these buildings may be to each other. Simply defining class-wise loss weights does not address the class imbalance problem as it causes the model to predict the label 'building' when the odds of that pixel belonging to 'background' and 'building' are similar, hence merging buildings with close proximity to each other.

To address this project utilizes the Focal Loss function, which is an extension of the standard cross entropy criterion that 'focuses' more on difficult misclassified instances. As the majority class become comparatively easier to predict, the rare class maintains a loss of non-trivial magnitude and this approach is reported to perform well in problems where classes demonstrate extreme imbalances. It would also mean that separating close buildings would potentially have higher focus as well, since that would also be an instance of non-trivial and hard-to-classify predictions.

Data is obtained through Label Maker API  which is developed by DevSeed group. Label Maker pulls mapping data and hence its labels from OpenStreetMap and combines those labels with raw satellite images from sources like Mapbox. Also, the list of all the regions that MissingMaps community have manually mapped and validated is available via a separate API called OSM Tasking Manager. It provides information on the mapped regions indicating the regions that are validated, the bounding box (latitude \& longitude) of each project and zoom level for which the images are available.

Eventually the project did not produced accurate enough results on this data despite archiving competitive results in other image segmentation datasets. This is mostly related to the labeling quality that we can currently obtain from OSM. As most of the labels are generated manually, most of the buildings in the rural regions, like the regions studied in this project are not labeled. Hence having most of the buildings in rural areas labeled as background result in the model predicting rural buildings as background.